--- 
title: FAQ
---

### Can you give me a Bioinformatics PhD studentship?

Sorry, no. I'm a not a professor.

### How can I find a PhD?

Take a little time when applying to supervisors rather than spamming many
bioinformatics researcher. Writing a generic cover letter and CV, then sending
these to everyone with a webpage will generally not be very succesful. I think
this is bad because in the first instance because supervisors know when someone
has sent them a CV on the off-chance of an offer. Secondly, do you want to
spend many years working on something you're not really interested in?

A better approach, after you've found all the projects you can, spend some time
reading the descriptions, narrow the list down to the ones that really excite
you. Read the last 2-3 papers that the supervisor wrote, and if you still want
to do the PhD, write to the PI telling them what excites you about their
research. You could also email the supervisor, and ask if you can phone to talk
about the project further. If you come across as a bright young researcher with
a lot to offer, you'll definitely get their interest.

### Should I do a Master's degree in Bioinformatics?

This depends on how you feel, but for me I'm glad I did a Masters. A year long
course gave me a chance to learn programming, statistics and other
bioinformatics foundations. The 4-6 month research project also gave me an idea
of whether or not I wanted to do a PhD. Of course plenty of researchers are
very successful in bioinformatics without ever having done a masters. Whatever
your decision, do a Masters or go straight into PhD, I really recommend
spending some time to learn programming before hand. If you're not already
familiar. Doing an evening class or getting a good text book and practising at
home will really help when you start on your research project.

### Which programming language should I use?

A simple answer would be Python. This language has become more and more popular
in bioinformatics, and so will have an increasing biolibrary base, as well as a
growing Python bioinformatics community. Python is also one of the easiest and
simple programming languages to learn. What makes a language simple and easy?
Well it reduces the options for the programmer to create bugs, and makes the
code easier to understand. However, as I said, that was the simple answer. For
instance, if you are about to start a Master's degree, it would be a better
idea to learn the language taught on the course. Another consideration is the
language used by your colleages, if you start using Python but everyone else is
using Perl, then there'll be less opportunity to get help or advice.
