--- 
kind: article
title: Bio::Blogs 11 - special edition
created_at: "2007-06-01 18:29:39"
---

Short and to the point - the tips &amp; tricks supplement to this month's 
bio::blogs edition has been compiled. The link to the pdf is at the end of this 
post. But first I want to thank those who contributed.

Thanks to <a href="http://eridanus.net/blog/">Dan Swan</a>, <a 
href="http://plindenbaum.blogspot.com/">Pierre Lindenbaum</a> and <a 
href="http://konradscons.blogspot.com/">Konrad Forstner</a>, who contributed 
particularly large articles covering every aspect of being a bioinformatian.

<a href="http://www.ghastlyfop.com/blog/">Euan Adie</a> (Stew) wrote about 
revision control, creating applications and blogging. <a 
href="http://scienceroll.com/">Bertalan MeskÃ³</a> sent in a list of genetic 
disorder databases. <a href="http://nftb.net/">Roland Krause</a> offers tips on 
managing and searching data sets. <a href="http://ryancastillo.org/">Ryan 
Castillo</a> wrote about his experiences in bioinformatics. <a 
href="http://www.paraschopra.com/blog/">Paras Chopra</a> offers advice for 
undergraduates on how to use their summers. <a 
href="http://pbeltrao.blogspot.com/">Pedro Beltrao</a>, editor of bio::blogs, 
discusses the importance of keeping up to date on the literature. Also, <a 
href="http://www.nodalpoint.org/user/duncan">Duncan Hull</a> whose observations 
I was unable to add due to lack of time and space (read: my poor organisational 
skills)

And finally, special thanks go to <a 
href="http://nsaunders.wordpress.com/">Neil Saunders</a> whose entry, on <a 
href="http://nsaunders.wordpress.com/2007/05/29/how-to-create-bioinformatics-code-from-a-published-article/">recreating 
code from bioinformatics papers</a>, was so large I couldn't fit it in the pdf, 
but you should definitely go and take a look.

Enjoy.

<a href="http://www.bioinformaticszen.com/wp-content/uploads/2007/05/bioblogs_special.pdf" title="Download"><img src="http://bioinformatics-zen.s3.amazonaws.com/icons/pdf.png" alt="Download" class="centre" /></a>
